Add blob sidecar inclusion proof (#3531)
ethereum/consensus-specs: specs/deneb/p2p-interface.md

## Modifications in Deneb

### Constant

*[New in Deneb:EIP4844]*

| Name                                     | Value                             | Description                                                         |
|------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `BLOB_KZG_COMMITMENTS_GINDEX`            | `get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments')` (= 27) | `blob_kzg_commitments` field gindex on `BeaconBlockBody` container |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `BLOB_KZG_COMMITMENTS_GINDEX`            | `get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments')` (= 27) | `blob_kzg_commitments` field generalized index on `BeaconBlockBody` container |
```

> | `BLOB_KZG_COMMITMENTS_GINDEX`            | `get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments')` (= 27) | `blob_kzg_commitments` field generalized index on `BeaconBlockBody` container |

Reviewer 2: I can’t find this constant to be used anywhere in the code except for the comments, is it required?

Reviewer 3: It is used to define the `KZG_COMMITMENT_INCLUSION_PROOF_DEPTH` value.

| `MAX_REQUEST_BLOB_SIDECARS`              | `MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_DENEB * MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` | Maximum number of blob sidecars in a single request  |
| `MIN_EPOCHS_FOR_BLOB_SIDECARS_REQUESTS`  | `2**12` (= 4096 epochs, ~18 days) | The minimum epoch range over which a node must serve blob sidecars  |
| `BLOB_SIDECAR_SUBNET_COUNT`              | `6`                               | The number of blob sidecar subnets used in the gossipsub protocol.  |

> | `BLOB_KZG_COMMITMENTS_GINDEX`            | `2**4 + 11`  (= 27)               | `blob_kzg_commitments` field gindex on `BeaconBlockBody` container  |

Reviewer 3: Is `BLOB_KZG_COMMITMENTS_GINDEX` unused?

Author: Please refer to the version at commit https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/8712451c43c60095eee2e10aaf996cf63710632a/specs/deneb/p2p-interface.md?plain=1#L54-L55 I would prefer to commit 8712451c43c60095eee2e10aaf996cf63710632a but the compilation does not prepend both lines in order, causing the used variable `BLOB_KZG_COMMITMENTS_GINDEX` to not be present

Reviewer 3: I see. I'll push more commits to address it.

Reviewer 3: I added some trick to bring `BLOB_KZG_COMMITMENTS_GINDEX` back and make it look smooth in the markdown file. (1657d16afd5d8def1b4f33999e7043f9ca7cd407)

| `MAX_REQUEST_BLOB_SIDECARS`              | `MAX_REQUEST_BLOCKS_DENEB * MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` | Maximum number of blob sidecars in a single request  |
| `MIN_EPOCHS_FOR_BLOB_SIDECARS_REQUESTS`  | `2**12` (= 4096 epochs, ~18 days) | The minimum epoch range over which a node must serve blob sidecars  |
| `BLOB_SIDECAR_SUBNET_COUNT`              | `6`                               | The number of blob sidecar subnets used in the gossipsub protocol.  |

> | `KZG_COMMITMENT_INCLUSION_PROOF_DEPTH`   | `17`                              | Merkle proof for `blob_kzg_commitments` list item                   |        

Reviewer 2: Note that if block body fields count goes beyond 16 this need to be increase, probably it worth increasing it now for the future compatibility sake

Author: We can't manipulate merkleization, the depth is what it is. This value will change in future forks when more properties are added. But I can define it better in terms that are fork dependent.

Reviewer 4: we should probably use the new partial container by @etan-status (tangential point from this discussion)

Reviewer 5: [`StableContainer`](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-7495) would be nice, but is unlikely to happen for Deneb given the progress. We can re-visit this for Electra, together with SSZ [transactions](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6493), [receipts](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6466), and [withdrawals](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-6465). Worst case, the index will change one time when we transition to `StableContainer` (and also in other places, at the same time)

Reviewer 5: And, if the depth changes in the future, we can also change the size of the proof at that time. just make sure that whenever it is transferred includes `Consensus-Fork` information. on libp2p that is given through forkdigest. on beacon-api it is added via HTTP header, and so on. so it is clear how to parse it. beaacon-API light client endpoints never needed a version bump for this reason because they were designed with forward compatibility in mind from the start.

```python
class BlobSidecar(Container):
    index: BlobIndex  # Index of blob in block
    blob: Blob
    kzg_commitment: KZGCommitment
    kzg_proof: KZGProof  # Allows for quick verification of kzg_commitment

>     commitment_inclusion_proof: [Bytes32, KZG_COMMITMENT_INCLUSION_PROOF_DEPTH]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    commitment_inclusion_proof: List[Bytes32, KZG_COMMITMENT_INCLUSION_PROOF_DEPTH]
```

```python
class BlobSidecar(Container):
    index: BlobIndex  # Index of blob in block
    blob: Blob
    kzg_commitment: KZGCommitment
    kzg_proof: KZGProof  # Allows for quick verification of kzg_commitment
    signed_block_header: SignedBeaconBlockHeader

>     commitment_inclusion_proof: List[Bytes32, KZG_COMMITMENT_INCLUSION_PROOF_DEPTH]

Reviewer 2: Considering `KZG_COMMITMENT_INCLUSION_PROOF_DEPTH` is a constant within a fork configuration, wouldn't it be better to use `Vector` instead?
```suggestion
    commitment_inclusion_proof: Vector[Bytes32, KZG_COMMITMENT_INCLUSION_PROOF_DEPTH]
```

##### `verify_blob_sidecar_signature`

```python
def verify_blob_sidecar_signature(state: BeaconState, blob_sidecar: BlobSidecar) -> bool:
    block_header = blob_sidecar.signed_block_header.message
    proposer = state.validators[block_header.proposer_index]
    domain = get_domain(state, DOMAIN_BEACON_PROPOSER, compute_epoch_at_slot(block_header.slot))
    signing_root = compute_signing_root(block_header, domain)
    return bls.Verify(proposer.pubkey, signing_root, blob_sidecar.signed_block_header.signature)
```

##### `verify_blob_sidecar_inclusion_proof`

```python
def verify_blob_sidecar_inclusion_proof(blob_sidecar: BlobSidecar) -> bool:
    commitment_item_gindex = MAX_BLOB_COMMITMENTS_PER_BLOCK + blob_sidecar.index
    gindex = BLOB_KZG_COMMITMENT_GINDEX + commitment_item_gindex << floorlog2(BLOB_ZKG_COMMITMENT_GINDEX)
    return is_valid_merkle_path(
        leaf=blob_sidecar.kzg_commitment.hash_tree_root(),
        branch=blob_sidecar.commitment_inclusion_proof,
        gindex=gindex,
        root=blob_sidecar.signed_block_header.message.body_root,
    )
```

#### `is_valid_merkle_path`

```python

> def is_valid_merkle_path(leaf: Bytes32, branch: Sequence[Bytes32], gindex: int, root: Root) -> bool:

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to reuse [`is_valid_merkle_branch`](https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/3531/files#is_valid_merkle_branch)?

Author: We can't re-use that function since this merkle proof involves two nested trees

Reviewer 2: I disagree on that, the validation algo is the same with the diff that a gindex value instead of a regular index is passed onto the call

#### Helpers

##### `verify_blob_sidecar_inclusion_proof`

```python
def verify_blob_sidecar_inclusion_proof(blob_sidecar: BlobSidecar) -> bool:

>     gindex = get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments', blob_sidecar.index)

Reviewer 2: Shouldn’t we use `BLOB_KZG_COMMITMENTS_GINDEX` constant here instead?

Reviewer 3: Here we have the third argument `blob_sidecar.index` to compute the Gindex of the specific commitment.

- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's index is consistent with `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` -- i.e. `sidecar.index < MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK`.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is for the correct subnet -- i.e. `compute_subnet_for_blob_sidecar(sidecar.index) == subnet_id`.
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is not from a future slot (with a `MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY` allowance) -- i.e. validate that `block_header.slot <= current_slot` (a client MAY queue future sidecars for processing at the appropriate slot).
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is from a slot greater than the latest finalized slot -- i.e. validate that `block_header.slot > compute_start_slot_at_epoch(state.finalized_checkpoint.epoch)`
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`) has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue sidecars for processing once the parent block is retrieved).
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`) passes validation.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is from a higher slot than the sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`).

> - _[REJECT]_ The proposer signature in `blob_sidecar.signed_block_header`, is valid with respect to the `proposer_index` pubkey.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- _[REJECT]_ The proposer signature of `blob_sidecar.signed_block_header`, is valid with respect to the `block_header.proposer_index` pubkey.
```

- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's inclusion proof is valid as verified by `verify_blob_sidecar_inclusion_proof`.

> - _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is the only sidecar with valid signature received for the tuple `(hash_tree_root(block_header), sidecar.index)`.

Reviewer 7: ... with valid proposer signature and inclusion proof ... ?

Reviewer 4: i guess we can remove `valid signature` and we can move this condition up to ignore early

Reviewer 7: Thinking more about that feel we should have an anti dos protection like the counterpart on the block side which is:

```
[IGNORE] The block is the first block with valid signature received for the proposer for the slot, signed_beacon_block.message.slot.
```

so here we might have:

```
[IGNORE] The block is the first block with valid signature (or valid inclusion proof) received for the proposer for the tuple `(block_header.slot, sidecar.index)`.
```

Reviewer 6: So I wouldn't put this wrt `block_header` in the tuple, I'd condition it on `proposer_index`  and slot (as done in the `beacon_block` conditions)

> [IGNORE] The sidecar is the first sidecar for the tuple `(block_header.slot, block_header.proposer_index, sidecar.index)` with valid header signature and sidecar inclusion proof

And I think you need it to be valid by those conditions listed (proposer signature and inclusion proof) so that an attacker doesn't mutate the valid message or create bad messages that clog up caches

Reviewer 6: @tbenr I don't tihnk you can *or* the valid inclusion proof. It must be both as an attacker could take the signed header and make bogus sidecars with bad inclusion proofs. Such an attacker should not be able to clog the cache

> - _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is proposed by the expected `proposer_index` for the block's slot in the context of the current shuffling (defined by `block_header.parent_root`/`block_header.slot`).

Reviewer 6: This should probably carry the optional queuing found in `beacon_block` gosspi conditions:

> If the proposer_index cannot immediately be verified against the expected shuffling, the block MAY be queued for later processing while proposers for the block's branch are calculated -- in such a case do not REJECT, instead IGNORE this message.

Author: Line below at 154 should include this wording already

Reviewer 6: oh whoops.

- _[REJECT]_ The proposer signature of `blob_sidecar.signed_block_header`, is valid with respect to the `block_header.proposer_index` pubkey.
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`) has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue sidecars for processing once the parent block is retrieved).
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`) passes validation.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is from a higher slot than the sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`).
- _[REJECT]_ The current finalized_checkpoint is an ancestor of the sidecar's block -- i.e. `get_checkpoint_block(store, block_header.parent_root, store.finalized_checkpoint.epoch) == store.finalized_checkpoint.root`.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's inclusion proof is valid as verified by `verify_blob_sidecar_inclusion_proof(blob_sidecar)`.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's blob is valid as verified by `verify_blob_kzg_proof(blob_sidecar.blob, blob_sidecar.kzg_commitment, blob_sidecar.kzg_proof)`.

> - _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is the first sidecar for the tuple (block_header.slot, block_header.proposer_index, blob_sidecar.index) with valid header signature, sidecar inclusion proof, and kzg proof.

Reviewer 5: This doesn't work if there is a reorg and the same proposer gets lucky and is selected at the same slot on both branches of the reorg.

Reviewer 5: It's actually even worse, because the blobs from the wrong branch may end up being assumed to be valid on the other branch. As the cache is populated _after_ validation, and validation is not re-done on each reorg.

Reviewer 8: No proposer should propose blocks on both sides of the reorg, and no two blocks on different sides of the reorg can have the same root so what will happen is that validators will take one side of the equivocation in this case, which is what we do with all equivocations.

Reviewer 5: Yes, it is slashable, but if we accept blobs on one branch, and then reorg to the other branch, we may still end up with that situation where we have the incorrect blobs matched with a block.

Reviewer 8: You can't cause the blockroot is different, they can't be matched

Reviewer 8: The inclusion proof is against the block root

Reviewer 5: only `body_root` not block root, but the problem is still the same: At the time when we receive the `BlobSidecar`, we are on the old branch, so the checks all pass, and we cache it for tuple `(block_header.slot, block_header.proposer_index, blob_sidecar.index)`. Then, there is a reorg and we switch to a new branch, with an equivocating block. For that one, we now reject any valid blobs because we already have `(block_header.slot, block_header.proposer_index, blob_sidecar.index)` cached, and we assume that the ones that we originally cached are actually valid for the new branch as well.

Reviewer 9: This gossip validation rule doesn't apply to RPC. If nodes are able to retrieve the missing sidecars for the new branch via `BlobSidecarsByRoot`, they would be able to verify DA and move forward.

Reviewer: > we assume that the ones that we originally cached are actually valid for the new branch as well.

I think this is not true. As @potuz said, the block root will be different and the inclusion proof will not be valid anymore because the block root in the new branch is different from the one in the old branch.

This topic is used to propagate signed blob sidecars, where each blob index maps to some `subnet_id`.

> The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `blob_sidecar` on the network, assuming the alias `sidecar = blob_sidecar` and `block_header = blob_sidecar.signed_block_header.message`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `sidecard` on the network, assuming the alias `block_header = sidecar.signed_block_header.message`:
```

There is no need to alias `blob_sidecar` to `sidecar`. I think it's better to have only one variable to avoid confusion.

- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's index is consistent with `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` -- i.e. `sidecar.index < MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK`.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is for the correct subnet -- i.e. `compute_subnet_for_blob_sidecar(sidecar.index) == subnet_id`.
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is not from a future slot (with a `MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY` allowance) -- i.e. validate that `block_header.slot <= current_slot` (a client MAY queue future sidecars for processing at the appropriate slot).
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is from a slot greater than the latest finalized slot -- i.e. validate that `block_header.slot > compute_start_slot_at_epoch(state.finalized_checkpoint.epoch)`
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`) has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue sidecars for processing once the parent block is retrieved).
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`) passes validation.

> - _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is from a higher slot than the sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`).

Reviewer 10: I'm not sure if this check is still necessary. The sidecar consists of a block header, which contains both the slot and the parent root. These elements are part of a single object and are signed over. The coupling appears to be tighter than before. I don't think that, in block gossip, we verify whether the block slot is higher than the parent slot

Author: block gossip topic checks that block is from a higher slot than the parent

https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/blob/9b1e0b73543aa1a62c4bd881fa7c1672dcc4348b/specs/phase0/p2p-interface.md?plain=1#L341

I seems like a reasonable sanity check, but no strong opinion

> - _[REJECT]_ The proposer signature of `blob_sidecar.signed_block_header`, is valid with respect to the `block_header.proposer_index` pubkey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _[REJECT]_ The proposer signature of `sidecar.signed_block_header`, is valid with respect to the `block_header.proposer_index` pubkey.
```
Wrt https://github.com/ethereum/consensus-specs/pull/3531/files#r1375435506

This topic is used to propagate signed blob sidecars, where each blob index maps to some `subnet_id`.

The following validations MUST pass before forwarding the `blob_sidecar` on the network, assuming the alias `block_header = blob_sidecar.signed_block_header.message`:

- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's index is consistent with `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` -- i.e. `blob_sidecar.index < MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK`.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is for the correct subnet -- i.e. `compute_subnet_for_blob_sidecar(blob_sidecar.index) == subnet_id`.
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is not from a future slot (with a `MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY` allowance) -- i.e. validate that `block_header.slot <= current_slot` (a client MAY queue future sidecars for processing at the appropriate slot).
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is from a slot greater than the latest finalized slot -- i.e. validate that `block_header.slot > compute_start_slot_at_epoch(state.finalized_checkpoint.epoch)`

> - _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`) has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue sidecars for processing once the parent block is retrieved).

Reviewer 10: In the block pipeline: `_[REJECT]_ The proposer signature of blob_sidecar.signed_block_header, is valid with respect to the block_header.proposer_index pubkey` is done before the parent root check
Without it, anyone can fake a blob sidecar and get clients to queue it cheaply. Updating it makes sense to be consistent with the block pipeline and alleviate some of the spam concern

- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's index is consistent with `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` -- i.e. `sidecar.index < MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK`.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is for the correct subnet -- i.e. `compute_subnet_for_blob_sidecar(sidecar.index) == subnet_id`.
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is not from a future slot (with a `MAXIMUM_GOSSIP_CLOCK_DISPARITY` allowance) -- i.e. validate that `block_header.slot <= current_slot` (a client MAY queue future sidecars for processing at the appropriate slot).
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is from a slot greater than the latest finalized slot -- i.e. validate that `block_header.slot > compute_start_slot_at_epoch(state.finalized_checkpoint.epoch)`
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`) has been seen (via both gossip and non-gossip sources) (a client MAY queue sidecars for processing once the parent block is retrieved).
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`) passes validation.
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is from a higher slot than the sidecar's block's parent (defined by `block_header.parent_root`).

> - _[REJECT]_ The proposer signature in `blob_sidecar.signed_block_header`, is valid as verified by `verify_blob_sidecar_signature`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- _[REJECT]_ The proposer signature in `blob_sidecar.signed_block_header`, is valid with respect to the `proposer_index` pubkey.
```

I believe we can get rid of the `verify_blob_sidecar_signature` function. The above rule is based on a similar one defined for the `beacon_block` topic

- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar's inclusion proof is valid as verified by `verify_blob_sidecar_inclusion_proof`.
- _[IGNORE]_ The sidecar is the only sidecar with valid signature received for the tuple `(hash_tree_root(block_header), sidecar.index)`.

> - _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is proposed by the expected `proposer_index` for the block's slot in the context of the current shuffling (defined by `parent_root`/`slot`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- _[REJECT]_ The sidecar is proposed by the expected `proposer_index` for the block's slot in the context of the current shuffling (defined by `block_header.parent_root`/`block_header.slot`).
```
